= Rubix

Rubix is a Ruby client for Zabbix[http://www.zabbix.com/].  It has a
few goals:

- Provide a +Connection+ and +Response+ class that abstract away the
  complexity[http://www.zabbix.com/documentation/1.8/api/getting_started]
  of authenticating with and sending API requests to Zabbix.

- Provide an ORM for Zabbix resources like Hosts, HostGroups,
  Templates, &c. using the {Zabbix
  API}[http://www.zabbix.com/documentation/1.8/api].

- Provide a command-line script that wraps the
  {+zabbix_sender+}[http://www.zabbix.com/documentation/1.8/manpages/zabbix_sender]
  utility, allowing it to consume JSON data and to 'auto-vivify'
  hosts, hostgroups, applications, and items.

- Provide some +Monitor+ classes that make it easy to write scripts
  that periodically measure something and push it to Zabbix.

- Have as few dependencies as possible: the core classes only depend
  on Ruby 1.8 standard library & +JSON+ and scripts additionally
  depend on +Configliere+[http://github.com/mrflip/configliere].

- Play nicely with Chef[http://www.opscode.com/chef/]  
  
There are a lot of other projects out there that connect Ruby to
Zabbix.  Here's a quick list:

zabbix[http://github.com/lorieri/zabbix]::
  zabbix aws templates, scripts, chef automations

zabbixapi[http://github.com/verm666/zabbixapi]::
  Ruby module for work with zabbix api
  
zabbix-rb[http://github.com/mhat/zabbix-rb]::
  send data to zabbix from ruby
  
zabbix_pusher[http://github.com/iteh/zabbix_pusher]::
  zabbix_pusher is a gem to parse zabbix templates and push the data
  to the corresponding zabbix server

zabbix-trappers[http://github.com/vzctl/zabbix-trappers]::
  Collection of ruby scripts for zabbix trappers
  
rzabbix[http://github.com/neerfri/rzabbix]::
  Zabbix API client for Ruby

zabboard[http://github.com/yammer/zabboard]::
  zabbix analytics
  
zabbix-web[http://github.com/legiar/zabbix-web]::
  Zabbix frontend

zabcon[http://trac.red-tux.net/]::
  Zabcon is a command line interface for Zabbix written in Ruby

None of these projects was satisfactory for our purposes so I decided
to write Rubix.  The name is terrible but the code is better.  Enjoy!

== Connections, Requests, & Responses

Getting connected is easy

  require 'rubix'

  # Provide API URL & credentials.  These are the defaults.
  Rubix.connect('http://localhost/api_jsonrpc.php', 'admin', 'zabbix')

As per the {Zabbixi API
documentation}[http://www.zabbix.com/documentation/1.8/api], each
request to the Zabbix API needs four values:

+id+::
  an integer identifying the request ID.

+auth+::
  a string confirming that the API request is authenticated.

+method+::
  the name of the API method you're calling, e.g. - <tt>host.get</tt>, <tt>template.delete</tt>, &c.

+params+::
  parameters for the invocation of the +method+.

When you send a request, Rubix only requires you to specify the
+method+ and the +params+, handling the +id+ and authentication
quietly for you:

  response = Rubix.connection.request('host.get', 'filter' => { 'host' => 'My Zabbix Host' })

  case
  when response.has_data?
    # Response is a success and "has data" -- it's not empty.  This
    # means we found our host.
    puts response.result
    #=> [{"hostid"=>"10017"}]
  when response.success?
    # Response was succssful but doesn't "have data" -- it's empty, no
    # such host!
    puts "No such host"
  else
    # Response was an error.  Uh oh!
    puts response.error_message
  end
  
=== On the command line

Rubix comes with a command line utility +zabbix_api+ which lets you
issue these sorts of requests directly on the command line.

  $ zabbix_api host.get '{"filter": {"host": "My Zabbix Host"}}'
  [{"hostid"=>"10017"}]

+zabbix_api+ lets you specify the credentials and will pretty-print
responses for you.  Try <tt>zabbix_api --help</tt> for more details.

== ORM

If you don't want to deal with the particulars of the Zabbix API
itself, Rubix provides a set of classes that you can use instead.

The following example goes through setting up an item on a host
complete with host groups, templates, applications, and so on.

  require 'rubix'
  Rubix.connect('http://localhost/api_jsonrpc.php', 'admin', 'zabbix')

  # Ensure the host group we want exists.
  host_group = Rubix::HostGroup.find_or_create(:name => "My Zabbix Hosts")

  # Now the template -- created templates are empty by default!
  template = Rubix::Template.new(:name => "Template_Some_Service")
  template.save
  
  # Now the host.
  host = Rubix::Host.new(:name => "My Host", :ip => '123.123.123.123', :templates => [template], :host_groups => [host_group])
  host.save

  # Now for the application
  app = Rubix::Application.new(:name => 'Some App', :host => host)
  app.save

  # Now the item
  item = Rubix::Item.new(:host => host, :key => 'foo.bar.baz', :description => "Some Item", :value_type => :unsigned_int, :applications => [app])
  item.save

You can also +update+ and +destroy+ resources.

Only host groups, templates, hosts, applications, user macros, and
items are available at present.  Other Zabbix resources (actions,
alerts, events, maps, users, &c.) can be similarly wrapped, they just
haven't been yet because we don't use them as much as we use these
core resources.

== Sender

Rubix comes with a +zabbix_pipe+ script which, coupled with the
{+zabbix_sender+}[http://www.zabbix.com/documentation/1.8/manpages/zabbix_sender]
utility, allows for writing data to Zabbix.

By the design of Zabbix, all data written via +zabbix_sender+ (and
therefore +zabbix_pipe+) must be written to items with type "Zabbix
trapper".  This type instructs Zabbix to accept values written by
+zabbix_sender+.

+zabbix_pipe+ can consume data from +STDIN+, a file on disk, or a
{named pipe}[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Named_pipe].  It consumes
data one line at a time from any of these sources and uses the
+zabbix_sender+ utility to send this data to a Zabbix server.

Here's an example of starting +zabbix_pipe+ and sending some data onto
Zabbix.  (Credentials and addresses for the Zabbix server and the
Zabbix API can all be customized; see the <tt>--help</tt> option.)

  # Send one data point -- this is tab separated!
  $ echo "foo.bar.baz	123" | zabbix_pipe --host='My Zabbix Host' --host_groups='My Zabbix Servers,Some Other Group'
  # Send a bunch of data points in a file
  $ cat my_data.tsv | zabbix_pipe --host='My Zabbix Host' --host_groups='My Zabbix Servers,Some Other Group'

You can also pass the file directly:

  # Send a bunch of data points in a file
  $ zabbix_pipe --host='My Zabbix Host' --host_groups='My Zabbix Servers,Some Other Group' my_data.tsv

You can also listen from a named pipe.  This is useful on a
"production" system in which many processes may want to simply and
easily write somewhere without worrying about what happens.

  # In the first terminal
  $ mkfifo /dev/zabbix
  $ zabbix_pipe --pipe=/dev/zabbix --host='My Zabbix Host' --host_groups='My Zabbix Servers,Some Other Group'

  # In another terminal
  $ echo "foo.bar.baz	123" > /dev/zabbix
  $ cat my_data > /dev/zabbix

In any of these modes, you can also send JSON data directly.

  $ echo '{"data": [{"key": "foo.bar.baz", "value": 123}, {"key": "foo.bar.baz", "value": 101}]}' > /dev/zabbix

This simple block of JSON doesn't really add any power to
+zabbix_pipe+.  What becomes more interesting is that we can wedge in
data for *diffferent* hosts, items, &c. when using JSON input:

  $ echo '{"host": "My first host", "host_groups": "My Zabbix Servers,Some Other Group", "data": [{"key": "foo.bar.baz", "value": 123}, {"key": "foo.bar.baz", "value": 101}]}' > /dev/zabbix
  $ echo '{"host": "My second host", "host_groups": "My Zabbix Servers,Some Other Group", "data": [{"key": "foo.bar.baz", "value": 123}, {"key": "foo.bar.baz", "value": 101}]}' > /dev/zabbix
  $ echo '{"host": "My third host", "host_groups": "My Zabbix Servers,Some Other Group", "data": [{"key": "foo.bar.baz", "value": 123}, {"key": "foo.bar.baz", "value": 101}]}' > /dev/zabbix

Rubix will switch hosts on the fly.

=== Auto-vivification

By default, for every item written into +zabbix_pipe+, Rubix will
first check, using the Zabbix API, whether an item with the given key
exists for the given host.  If not, Rubix will create the host and
the item.  You can pass a few details along with your data (when
writing in JSON format) or at startup of the +zabbix_pipe+ to tune
some of the properites of newly created hosts and items:

  $ echo '{"host": "My host", "hostgroups": "Host Group 1,Host Group 2", "templates": "Template 1,Template 2", "applications": "App 1, App2", "data": [{"key": "foo.bar.baz", "value": 123}, {"key": "foo.bar.baz", "value": 101}]}' > /dev/zabbix

If the host 'My host' does not exist, Rubix will create it, putting in
each of the host groups 'Host Group 1' and 'Host Group 2' (which will
also be auto-vivified), and attach it to templates 'Template 1' and
'Template 2' (auto-vivified).  If the item does not exist for the host
'My host', then it will be created and put inside applications 'App1'
and 'App2' (auto-vivified).  The value type of the item (unsigned int,
float, character, text, &c.) will be chosen dynamically based on the
value being written. The created items will all be of the type "Zabbix
trapper" so that they can be written to.

Auto-vivification is intended to make it easy to register a lot of
dynamic hosts and items in Zabbix.  This is perfect for cloud
deployments where resources to be monitored are often dynamic.

==== Failed writes

By the design of Zabbix, a newly created item of type 'Zabbix trapper'
will not accept data for some interval, typically a minute or so,
after being created.  This means that when writing a series of values
for some non-existent item 'foo.bar.baz', the first write will cause
the item to be created (auto-vivified), the next several writes will
fail as the Zabbix server is not accepting writes for this item yet,
and then all writes will begin to succeed as the Zabbix server catches
up.  If it is absolutely essential for all writes to succeed,
including the first, then +zabbix_pipe+ needs to go to sleep for a
while after creating a new item in order to give the Zabbix server
time to catch up.  This can be configured with the
<tt>--create_item_sleep</tt> option.  By default this is set to 0.

==== Skipping auto-vivification

Attempting to auto-vivify keys on every single write is expensive and
does not scale.  It's recommended, therefore, to run +zabbix_pipe+
with the <tt>--fast</tt> flag in production settings.  In this mode,
+zabbix_pipe+ will not attempt to auto-vivify anything -- if items do
not exist, writes will just fail, as they do with +zabbix_sender+
itself.

A good pattern is to set up a production pipe (in <tt>--fast</tt>)
mode at <tt>/dev/zabbix</tt> and to do all development/deployment with
a separate instance of +zabbix_pipe+.  Once development/deployment is
complete and all hosts, groups, templates, applications, and items
have been created, switch to writing all data in "production mode"
using the <tt>--fast</tt> pipe at <tt>/dev/zabbix</tt>.

== Monitors

Rubix also comes with some classes that make it easy to write simple
monitors.  The output of these monitors should match the expected
input format of +zabbix_pipe+.  This way they can be chained together.
Here's an example of a simple monitor that calculates the currently
used memory in bytes.

  # in memory_monitor.rb
  require 'rubix'

  class MemoryMonitor < Rubix::Monitor
    def measure
      write do |data|
        mem_used = `free | tail -n+2 | head -n1`.chomp.split[2].to_i
        data << [['mem.used', mem_used]]
      end
    end
  end

  MemoryMonitor.run if $0 == __FILE__

The file <tt>memory_monitor.rb</tt> can now be run on the command line in
various ways:

  # Write the output to STDOUT
  $ ruby memory_monitor.rb
  'mem.used'	11595908

  # Loop every 30 seconds
  $ ruby memory_monitor.rb --loop=30

  'mem.used'	11595760
  'mem.used'	11595800
  'mem.used'	11596016
  'mem.used'	11596008

It can be piped into a running +zabbix_pipe+:

  $ ruby memory_monitor.rb --loop=30 > /dev/zabbix &

=== Monitors with Chef

It's useful to be able to monitor resources defined in
Chef[http://www.opscode.com/chef/] and so Rubix comes with a
+ChefMonitor+ class.

  # in webserver_monitor.rb
  require 'rubix'
  require 'net/http'
  require 'uri'
  
  class WebserverMonitor < Rubix::ChefMonitor

    def webserver
      @webserver ||= chef_node_from_node_name('my_webserver')
    end

    def uri
      URI.parse("http://#{webserver['ec2']['public_hostname']}")
    end
  
    def measure
      begin
        if Net::HTTP.get_response(uri).code.to_i == 200
          availability = 1
        else
          availability = 0
	end
      rescue => e
        availability = 0
      end
      write do |data|
        data << ([['webserver.available', availability]])
      end
    end
  end

  WebserverMonitor.run if $0 == __FILE__

To run this monitor you'll have to pass in credentials used to authenticate with Chef:

  $ sudo ruby webserver_monitor.rb --chef_server_url=http://api.opscode.com/organizations/my_company --chef_node_name=this_node --chef_client_key=/etc/chef/client.pem --loop=30 > /dev/zabbix

Make sure you can read the file at <tt>/etc/chef/client.pem</tt>!
